# Solution to Review Question

by Qiang Gao, updated at May 20, 2017

---

## Chapter 1 Finite-Sample Properties of OLS

### Section 7 Application: Returns to Scale in Electricity Supply

...

#### Review Question 1.7.8

Taking logs of both sides of the production function (1.7.1), one can derive the log-linear relationship

$$
\log ( Q_i ) = \alpha_0 + \alpha_1 \log ( x_{i1} ) +
\alpha_2 \log ( x_{i2} ) + \alpha_3 \log ( x_{i3} ) +
\varepsilon_i,
\tag{1}
$$

where

$$
\alpha_0 \equiv \mathrm{E} [ \log ( A_i ) ],
\qquad
\varepsilon_i \equiv \log ( A_i ) - \mathrm{E} [ \log ( A_i ) ].
$$

Suppose, in addition to total costs, output, and factor prices, we had data on factor inputs. (a) Can we estimate $$ \alpha $$'s by applying OLS to this log-linear relationship? Why or why not? (b) Suggest a different way to estimate $$\alpha$$'s.

##### Solution

(a) The economic interpretation of the error term $$ \varepsilon_i $$ represents the firm's production efficiency relative to the industry's average efficiency. The input choice of the firm $$ ( x_{i1}, x_{i2}, x_{i3} ) $$ can depend on $$ \varepsilon_i $$, making regressors not be orthogonal to the error term. Applying OLS to log-linear relationship (1) will result in biased estimator, so we cannot estimate $$\alpha$$'s using OLS.

(b) Following microeconomic theory, under the Cobb-Douglas technology, input shares do not depend on factor prices.

This can be seen as follows. From equation (8) and (10) in [solution to review question 1.7.1](1.7.1.md),

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{ p_{i2} x_{i2} }{ p_{i1} x_{i1} } & =
\frac{ \alpha_2 }{ \alpha_1 },
\tag{1}
\\
\frac{ p_{i3} x_{i3} }{ p_{i1} x_{i1} } & =
\frac{ \alpha_3 }{ \alpha_1 }.
\tag{2}
\end{align}
$$

The input shares are calculated as

$$
\frac{ p_{i1} x_{i1} }{ p_{i1} x_{i1} + p_{i2} x_{i2} + p_{i3} x_{i3} } =
\frac{1}{ 1 + \alpha_2 / \alpha_1 + \alpha_3 / \alpha_1 } =
\frac{ \alpha_1 }{ \alpha_1 + \alpha_2 + \alpha_3 },
\tag{3}
$$

similarly,

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{ p_{i2} x_{i2} }{ p_{i1} x_{i1} + p_{i2} x_{i2} + p_{i3} x_{i3} } & =
\frac{ \alpha_2 }{ \alpha_1 + \alpha_2 + \alpha_3 },
\tag{4}
\\
\frac{ p_{i3} x_{i3} }{ p_{i1} x_{i1} + p_{i2} x_{i2} + p_{i3} x_{i3} } & =
\frac{ \alpha_3 }{ \alpha_1 + \alpha_2 + \alpha_3 }.
\tag{5}
\end{align}
$$

It is evident that these input shares are determined completely by parameters and do not depend on factor prices.

Under constant returns to scale, these shares equal to $$\alpha_1$$, $$\alpha_2$$ and $$\alpha_3$$ respectively. So we can estimate these parameters using sample averages of input shares.

---

Copyright ©2017 by Qiang Gao